0.0	Uncharacterized	Class description: No DNA-binding domain has been identified in these factors, although there is evidence that they may be (DNA-binding) transcription factors.
0.1	AXUD/CSRNP domain factors	Class description: Factors of this family possess a conserved domain comprising a serine-rich, a basic and a cysteine-rich region. The mouse ortholog of CSRNAP-1 binds to AGAGTG. (PMID 17726538)
0.2	NonO domain factors	Class description: A group of multifunctional factors, probably involved in transcriptional as well as in splicing regulation. Transcriptional regulation is most likely through direct DNA-binding. All factors of this class identified so far exhibit a highly charge region of 124 amino acid residues N-terminally of two RRMs (RNA-recognition motifs).
0.3	Leucine-rich repeat flightless-interacting proteins	Class description: A 100-aa DNA-binding domain has been identified in LRRFIP1; it shows only limited homology with the corresponding region in LRRFIP2, for which DNA-binding has not yet been shown. In either case, this region contains many charged side chains.
0.4	NFX1-type putative zinc finger factors	Class description: A large class of proteins, with most known members from the plant kingdom. The DNA-binding domain comprises a cysteine-rich region with a repeated motif of the signature C-x(1-6)-H-x-C-x3-C-h-x(3-4)-C-x(1-10)-C (with the lower-case histidine occasionally replaced by another cysteine). Although this motif has been denominated 'NFX1-type zinc finger', neither zinc ion binding nor its 3D structure have been unravelled so far. (PMID 7964459, PMID 20522174)
1.1	Basic leucine zipper factors (bZIP)	TRANSFAC class description C0008: A DNA-binding basic region is followed by a leucine zipper. The leucine zipper consists of repeated leucine residues at every seventh position and mediates protein dimerization as a prerequisite for DNA-binding. The leucines are directed towards one side of an alpha-helix. The leucine side chains of two polypeptides are thought to interdigitate upon dimerization (knobs-into-holes model). The leucine zipper dictates dimerization specificity. Upon DNA-binding of the dimer, the basic regions adopt alpha-helical conformation as well. Possibly, a sharp angulation point separates two alpha-helices of the subregions A and B leading to the scissors grip model for the bZIP-DNA complex. The DNA is contacted through the major groove over a whole turn.
1.2	Basic helix-loop-helix factors (bHLH)	TRANSFAC class description C0010: A DNA-binding basic region is followed by a motif of two potential amphipathic alpha-helices connected by a loop of variable length, possibly an omega loop. This putative helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif mediates dimerization as a prerequisite for DNA-binding. Upon dimerization, the alpha-helical content may significantly increase supporting the model of a four-helix bundle dimerization interface. Probably, the HLH domains of both dimer constituents are arranged in a parallel orientation. The basic region dictates DNA-binding specificity. Upon DNA-binding of the dimer, the basic regions adopt alpha-helical conformation as well.
1.3	Basic helix-span-helix factors (bHSH)	TRANSFAC class description C0032: Examining human AP-2 as paradigm of this structural class, a DNA-contacting domain was identified which comprises several clusters of basic amino acid side chains. C-terminally adjacent to it, a dimerization domain was found which consists of two putative alpha-helices separated by a span of over 80 amino acids. This HSH dimerization domain can functionally replace the ZIP dimerization domain of c-Jun. (PMID 1998122)
2.1	Nuclear receptors with C4 zinc fingers	TRANSFAC class description C0002: Zinc finger motif of nuclear receptor type. Two such motifs differing in size, composition and function are present in each receptor molecule. Each finger comprises 4 cysteine residues coordinating one zinc ion. The second half including the second cysteine pair has alpha-helix conformation, the helix of the first finger binds to the DNA through the major groove. The sequence between the first two cysteines of the second finger mediates dimerization upon DNA-binding.
2.2	Other C4 zinc finger-type factors	TRANSFAC class description C0004: Zinc finger motif of C4 type. Each finger comprises 4 cysteine residues presumably coordinating one zinc ion. TRANSFAC class description C0003: Zinc finger motif of GATA-type. Can be subclassified into two sub-types, one of which is found in animal factors, the other one in plant factors. In fungi factors from both groups have been found. Most known animal GATA factors contain two zinc finger domains; most known fungal, plant and slime mold GATA factors only one (PMID 9581501). In case of the two-fingered factors, as far as it has been investigated, only the C-terminal zinc finger plus an adjacent basic region are essential and sufficient for DNA-binding (PMID 2276623, PMID 1406646, PMID 8446581). Each finger comprises 4 cysteine residues coordinating one zinc ion. The DNA-binding zinc finger is composed of two irregular antiparallel beta-sheets and an alpha-helix; similar in structure, although not in sequence to the zinc finger of the glucocorticoid receptor DNA binding domain. The alpha-helix and the loop connecting the two antiparallel beta-sheets interact with the major groove of the DNA. The basic region carboxyl-terminal to the zinc finger wraps around into the minor groove (PMID 8332909).
2.3	C2H2 zinc finger factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0001: Zinc finger motif of TFIIIA/Krueppel type. Each finger comprises 2 cysteine and 2 histidine residues coordinating one zinc ion, in some cases one histidine is replaced by another cysteine. The zinc ion is essential for DNA-binding. The first half of the finger sequence is generally organized in two antiparallel beta-strands, the second half as an alpha-helix and partly as an 310-helix. Hydrophobic contacts between the beta-strands and the alpha-helix are formed by the conserved phenylalanine and leucine residues. The alpha-helix binds to DNA through the major groove. The finger link frequently is TGEKPY.
2.5	DM-type intertwined zinc finger factors	Class description: The known transcription factors exhibiting a DNA-binding domain of intertwined zinc fingers belong to the DM group of proteins, named after Drosophila Doublesex and C. elegans Meb-3. Intertwined are one zinc finger of C2HC and one of HCC2 type, each binding one zinc ion. Together, they follow the consensus pattern C--C--h--------H---C----c-c-c, where upper and lower case letter refer to either zinc finger, and dashes symbolize any other amino acid. The most C-terminal cysteine is part of a short alpha-helical structure, which extends into a carboxy-terminal tail that stably folds into an alpha helix upon binding to DNA. This recognition helix binds in the minor groove of the DNA. In contrast to other minor-groove binders, it does not induce a sharp bending of the DNA. (PMID 16382145)
2.6	CXXC zinc finger factors	Class description: CXXC zinc fingers contain two zinc ion binding 4-cysteine patterns, each of them comprising a CGxCxxC motif and a distantly located cysteine. One of these patterns (with lower-case Cs) is embedded within the other (with upper-case Cs): C-x(2)-C-x(2)-C-x(5,6)-c-x(2)-c-x(2)-c-x(9,15)-c-x(4)-C. The second and third cysteine of each motif lie within a short alpha-helix. The overall finger structure also forms a two-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet, the two beta-strands being located immediately N- and C-terminally adjacent to the CXXC zinc finger pattern. The CXXC zinc finger binds to DNA at CpG-containing sequences, most of the contacts are exerted by residues of an extended loop in the x(9,15) region of the above signature. (PMID 16990798)
2.8	C3H zinc finger factors	Class description: These factors comprise a putative zinc finger motif with the signature C------C-----C---H. DNA-binding has been proven only for three proteins of this class, ZC3H8 (2.8.1.0.1), of which closely related proteins have been included for similarity, ZGPAT (2.8.2.0.1), with no close relatives found, and RC3H2 (2.8.4.0.1). Most, if not all, other proteins of this class appear to be RNA-binders and be involved more likely in splicing rather than transcriptional regulation.
2.9	C2CH THAP-type zinc finger factors	Class description: THAP-type zinc fingers follow the signature C- x(2-4)-C-x(35-50)-C-x2-H. Compared with 'canonical' C2H2 zinc fingers, those of THAP type exhibit an unusually long spacing between the first pair of cysteines and the following cysteine-histidine pair, which together coordinate one zinc ion. This long spacer adopts a beta-alpha-beta structure, with the second beta-strand right in front of the third cysteine. An additional short 3,10-helix comprises the zinc-coordinating histidine residue. The two beta-strands form a beta-sheet that inserts into the major groove, whereas the loop following the zinc finger exerts minor groove contacts. (PMID 18073205, PMID 20010837)
3.1	Homeo domain factors	TRANSFAC class description C0006: Three consecutive alpha-helix structures, helix 3 contacts mainly the major groove of the DNA, some contacts at the minor groove are observed as well. Helix 2 and 3 resemble the helix-turn-helix structure of prokaryotic regulators.
3.2	Paired box factors	TRANSFAC class description C0017: DNA-binding domain of approximately 130 amino acid residues. Its N-terminal half is basic, its C-terminal half highly charged in general. It probably comprises 3 alpha-helices. TRANSFAC class description C0018: A paired box is combined with a C-terminally located homeo domain. The paired box comprises approximately 130 amino acid residues. Its N-terminal half is basic, its C-terminal half highly charged in general. It probably comprises 3 alpha-helices. Three consecutive alpha-helix structures, helix 3 contacts mainly the major groove of the DNA, some contacts at the minor groove are observed as well. Helix 2 and 3 resemble the helix-turn-helix structure of prokaryotic regulators.
3.3	Fork head / winged helix factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0023: Identified by homology between HNF-3A and fkh. The domain comprises approx. 110 AA. Analysis of the crystal structure has revealed a compact structure of three alpha-helices, the third alpha-helix being exposed towards the major groove of the DNA. The domain also exerts minor groove contacts. Upon binding to DNA, it induces a bend of 13 degree.
3.4	Heat shock factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0050: Modular structure with an N-terminal DNA binding domain characterized by a central helix-turn-helix motif, an adjacent domain with heptad hydrophobic repeats (HR-A/B) involved in oligomerization, a cluster of basic amino acid residues essential for nuclear import (NLS), and an acidic C-terminal activation domain. (PMID 8689565, PMID 9869631)
3.5	Tryptophan cluster factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0022: The tryptophan clusters comprise several tryptophan residues with a spacing of 12-21 amino acid residues; the subclass of myb-type DNA-binding domains typically exhibit a spacing of 19-21 amino acid residues. All IRF family members, except IRF-1 and IRF-2, contain conserved IAD, IRF association domain that is responsible for protein-protein interactions with other IRF family members or with Ets factor PU.1 and/or bHLH factor E47. IRF-1 and IRF-2 contain IAD2 that is conserved between them and, like IAD, involved in protein-protein interactions. (PMID 10586038)
3.6	TEA domain factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0024: The TEA domain has been identified as a region which is conserved among the transcription factors TEF-1, TEC1 and abaA. This domain in TEF-1 has been shown to interact with DNA, although two additional regions may also contribute to DNA-binding. It is predicted to fold into three alpha-helices, with a randomly coiled region of 16-18 amino acid residues between helices 1 and 2, and a short stretch between helices 2 and 3 of 3-8 residues.
4.1	High-mobility group (HMG) domain factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0015: Proteins of this class comprise a region of homology with the chromosomal non-histone HMG proteins such as HMG1. This region comprises the DNA-binding domain which in some instances such as HMG1 mediates sequence-unspecific, in other cases such LEF-1 sequence-specific binding to DNA. This domain exhibits a typical L-shaped conformation made up of 3 alpha-helices and an extended N-terminal extension of the first helix. The latter together with helix 1, which contains a kink, form the long arm of the L, whereas helices 1 and 2 form the short arm. Binding to the minor groove induces a sharp bending of the DNA by more than 90 degree, away from the bound protein. The overall topology of the DNA-protein complexes resembles somewhat that of the TBP-TATA box complex.
4.2	Heteromeric CCAAT-binding factors	Class description: The heteromeric CCAAT-binding factor known from mammalian systems is NF-Y (CBF, CP1), a homolog of yeast HAP2/3/4. Like the latter, it is a heterotrimeric complex of which all three subunits NF-YA, NF-YB and NF-YC are required for binding to the CCAAT-element on the DNA. NF-YB and NF-YC both exhibit a histone-fold domain, showing some homology with histones H2B and H2A, respectively. These regions are required for heterodimerization, which is followed by docking of NF-YA. Modeling of the NF-Y complex and its binding to DNA according to the homology with histone and NC2 complexes suggests that the heterotrimeric complex provides an alpha-helically folded interface to interact with the DNA. Contribution of some loop structures is also conceivable. Upon binding through major and minor groove contacts, the NF-Y complex induces considerable bending of the DNA. (PMID 12401788)
5.1	MADS box factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0014: Proteins of this class comprise a region of homology. The DNA-binding domain also comprises the dimerization capability. In the DNA-bound dimer (shown for SRF), two antiparallel amphipathic alpha-helices (alpha-I), form a coiled coil and are oriented approximately parallel on the minor groove. These helices make minor and major groove contacts, the N-terminal extensions form minor groove contacts. The bound DNA  is bent and wrapped around the protein. It exhibits a compressed minor groove in the center and widened minor groove in the flanks. (PMID 7637780)
5.3	SAND domain factors	Class description: A twisted beta-sheet exposes four alpha-helices that are packed against one side of the sheet. Most important for DNA-binding is a KDWK motif at the N-terminus of the third alpha-helix. Residues of this alpha-helix and the KWDK motif contact bases through the major groove, but the alpha-helix does not insert into the major groove. The domain structure of some of the class members is supported by an overlaying zinc coordinating motif. (PMID 11427895, PMID 15649886)
6.1	Rel homology region (RHR) factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0020: The structure of the Rel-type DBD exhibits a bipartite subdomain structure, each subdomain comprising a beta-barrel with five loops that form an extensive contact surface to the major groove of the DNA. Particularly, the first loop of the N-terminal subdomain (the highly conserved recognition loop) performs contacts with the recognition element on the DNA, but other loops are involved. The fact that the main DNA-contacts are made through loops has been suggested to provide a high degree of flexibility in binding to a range of different target sequences. Augmenting interactions are achieved by two alpha-helices within the N-terminal part that form strong minor groove contacts to the A/T-rich center of the  B-element. In p65, the sequence between both alpha-helices is much shorter and even helix 2 is truncated. The second, C-terminal domain is necessary mainly for protein dimerization.
6.2	STAT domain factors	Class description: STAT proteins bind to DNA as dimers. The DNA-contacting interface is organized by an eight-stranded beta-barrel, N-terminally preceded by a four-helix bundle and C-terminally followed by a mostly alpha-helical connector region. The residues that bind to the major groove of the DNA are mostly exposed by loops connecting the beta-strands of the beta-barrel and the one linking the beta-barrel and the first helix of the 'connector' region. The STAT dimer nearly completely embraces the DNA double helix, compared with a 'pair of pliers' (PMID 9671298), with the DNA-binding interface as jaws and the four-helix bundles as handles. Bound by STAT, the DNA undergoes a moderate bending of about 40 degrees. (PMID 9671298)
6.3	p53 domain factors	Class description: A beta sandwich constitutes a scaffold that exposes several loops and a loop-sheet-helix motif. One of the loops forms a contact of an arginine residue in the minor, side chains of the loop-sheet-helix motif in the major groove of the DNA. (PMID 8023157, PMID 21464285)
6.4	Runt domain factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0029: The members of this transcription factor class have been identified on the basis of their homology to a defined region within the Drosophila protein Runt. The runt domain (of RUNX1) contains twelve beta strands, seven of which shape the fold of an immunoglobulin-like beta sandwich (S-type Ig fold) also found in the DNA-binding domains of other transcription factors (NF-kappaB, NFAT, p53, STAT, and the T-domain) that is preceded by an N-terminal alpha helix (PMID 10404214, PMID 10545320, PMID 12217689). The runt domain is responsible for both DNA-binding and heterodimerization which occur at distinct, non-overlapping sites within the domain (PMID 11327761). Heterodimerization with CBFbeta leads to conformational changes in the runt domain (S-switch) that stabilize DNA binding. (PMID 10734228, PMID 11257229, PMID 12217689)
6.5	T-Box factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0044: The T domain has originally been discovered in Brachyury (T) the founder member of the T-box family. It encodes a DNA binding domain of about 180 amino acids. X-ray analysis of the T domain showed that it binds as a dimer to a 20 nucleotide partially palindromic sequence. A new type of specific DNA contact is seen, in which a carboxy-terminal helix is deeply embedded into an enlarged minor groove without bending the DNA.
6.6	NDT80 domain factors	Class description: A beta sandwich comprising a three-standed sheet packed against a four-stranded sheet constitutes a scaffold that exposes the DNA-contacting amino acid residues of six distinct regions. Most of these residues are located in loops, some are part of short alpha-helices or beta-strands. They form both minor and major groove contacts to the DNA. (PMID 12411490)
7.1	SMAD/NF-1 DNA-binding domain factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0059: Significant similarities between DNA binding domains of Smad and NF1 factors have been revealed by a PSI-BLAST database search. Authors have proposed that Smad and NF1 factors belong to the same group of genes probably resulting from the common ancestry [25470]. For more details about Smad or NF1 factors see <C0041> and <C0060> correspondingly. TRANSFAC class description C0041: Proteins with 2 MAD-homology domains at N- and C-terminal ends, which have been named MH1 and MH2, are independently folded structures (PMID 10605817); the structure of the MH2 domain is a beta-sandwich with a 3-alpha-helix bundle at one end, and 3 large loops and an alpha-helix at the other end (PMID 10605817); the loop-helix region of one subunit packs against the 3-alpha-helix bundle of another subunit (PMID 10605817); MH1, a novel type of DBD, consists of 4 alpha-helixes, 6 short beta-strands, and 5 loops. Beta-strands form 2 small beta-sheets and 1 beta-hairpin (PMID 9741623); base-specific DNA recognition of the MH1 domain bound to a GTCT motif is via an 11-amino acid beta-hairpin, which lies in the major groove of the DNA (PMID 9741623, PMID 10605817); 3 classes of SMAD: Inhibitory SMADs (SMAD-6,SMAD-7), Receptor-regulated SMADs (SMAD-1, SMAD-2, SMAD-3, SMAD-5, SMAD-8), Common Mediator SMADs (SMAD-4, SMAD-4beta, SMAD-10). (PMID 10605817)
7.2	GCM domain factors	TRANSFAC class description C0031: Within the N-terminal parts of Drosophila GCM, human and mouse GCMa and murine GCMb, a region of about 150 AA was disclosed that exhibits a high degree of homology. This gcm-motif is responsible for DNA-binding. Within this motif, three regions of identity were discovered: A, 10 AA; B, 9 AA; C, 10 AA. Additionally, there are 7 conserved Cys and 4 conserved His residues scattered over the gcm-motif.
8.1	TATA-binding proteins	Class description: A 10-stranded, anti-parallel beta-sheet forms a quasi-symmetric saddle-like structure, where the convex side is backed by four alpha-helices and the concave side exerts mostly hydrophobic interactions with the minor groove of the TATA-box. Binding of TBP imposes a significant kink of the DNA double helix axis. (PMID 10617571, and references cited therein)
8.2	A.T hook factors	Class description: The A.T hook is a short sequence motif of 9-16 amino acids, occurring in multiple repeats (3 in the human HMGA factors). It is unordered when free in solution, but adopts an extended conformation upon binding to the minor groove of an AT-rich DNA sequence. In contrast to TBP, it does not hydrophobically intercalate and therefore preserves the B conformation of the bound DNA. (PMID 9253416)
9.1	Cold-shock domain factors	TRANSFAC<sup>&reg;</sup> class description C0019: Cold-shock domain proteins are characterized by a highly conserved region first found in prokaryotic cold-shock proteins (PMID 1622927, PMID 8031301). This domain is a single-stranded nucleic acid-binding structure interacting with DNA or RNA. It consists of an antiparallel five-stranded beta-barrel, the strands of which are connected by turns and loops (PMID 8321288, PMID 8321289). Within this structure, a three-stranded beta-strand contains a conserved RNA-binding motif, RNP1 (PMID 8321288, PMID 8321289, PMID 8967899). Not all CSD proteins are transcription factors. Those which specifically bind to a certain sequence are termed Y-box proteins. - Proteins of this class were previously called protamine-like domain proteins because of having a highly positively charged domain with interspersed proline residues.
3.7	ARID	 
6.7	Grainyhead	 
