0	Yet undefined DNA-binding domains	Class description: Factors of this superclass have been shown to bind to DNA in a sequence-specific manner, but their DNA-binding domain has not yet been identified and/or structurally characterized.
1	Basic domains	TRANSFAC class description C0033: Proteins belonging to this superfamily contact the DNA through a basic region which free in solution has a random structure, but becomes alpha-helically folded upon binding to DNA (PMID 2120592, PMID 2145515, PMID 1312255, PMID 8479534, PMID 7926781). Most prominent classes of this group are the bZIP and bHLH proteins. There is no 'consensus' motif for all basic domains of this superfamily. Even the basic regions of bZIP and bHLH factors diverge greatly, although their mode of interacting with the DNA is strictly homologous: A specific alpha-helical dimerization domain provides the linkage between two DNA-contacting basic regions which adopt helical conformation when their positively charged side chains are neutralized by the phosphate backbone of the DNA.
2	Zinc-coordinating DNA-binding domains	TRANSFAC class description C0034: In polymerase III transcription factor TFIIIA, a repetitive pattern of cysteine and histidine residues was discovered and, together with the known zinc-dependence of TFIIIA, led to the model of 'zinc fingers' of the Cys2His2 type (PMID 3191912, PMID 6196359). Shortly after, sequences coding for the estrogen receptor were cloned and revealed a somewhat similar arrangement of cysteine residues only (Cys4), with no additional homologies (PMID 3755102, PMID 4040853). Nevertheless, a zinc finger model was proposed for these factors as well and was subsequently proven, with a minor alteration in the Cys pattern (PMID 3780678). In addition to these two large classes of zinc finger proteins, there are many factors revealing Cys4 zinc fingers of variable composition, such as the GATA-factors, some fungal regulators and adenovirus E1A. Finally, the yeast GAL4-like regulators are grouped together as Cys6 'zinc clusters'.
3	Helix-turn-helix domains	TRANSFAC class description C0035: The helix-turn-helix superclass is a particularly large and heterogeneous family of transcription factors. Their DNA-binding motif appeared very early during evolution since it is found in prokaryotic and bacteriophage regulators as well as in mammalian transcriptional activators and repressors (PMID 6236744, PMID 6330566, PMID 6429549). Presumably due to this property, most of them fulfill elementary functions in eukaryotes such as developmental regulation and determination of differentiation processes. In general, they comprise a DNA-recognition helix which inserts into the major DNA groove, another one which exerts unspecific stabilizing backbone interactions, and in most cases additional helices which help to stabilize the overall structure of the DNA-binding module.
4	Other all-alpha-helical DNA-binding domains	Class description: This superclass comprises transcription factors with DNA-binding domains that exhibit  alpha-helically structured interfaces interacting with the DNA. So far, only the HMG proteins are structurally well characterized, whereas the DNA-binding mode of NF-Y proteins is mainly based on modeling by homology. The proteins of this group show significant similarities to some non-specific DNA-binding proteins.
5	alpha-Helices exposed by beta-structures	Class description: Members of this superclass possess a DNA-contact interface of alpha-helices, which are exposed by a scaffold of beta-strands. Different to members of superclasses 1-4, the DNA-binding alpha helices do not insert in either groove but rather are packed against the DNA.
6	Immunoglobulin fold	Class description: DNA-binding domains of this superclass exhibit an immunoglobulin-like fold. It is characterized by a beta-core structure, usually a beta-sandwich, which exposes a DNA-contact interface of mostly loops, but also other secondary structure elements, from which the DNA-binding amino acid residues are protruding.
7	beta-Hairpin exposed by an alpha/beta-scaffold	Class description: The DNA-binding domains of this superclass have an alpha/beta-structured scaffold that exposes a beta-hairpin. This hairpin is the main DNA-contacting element and inserts into the major groove of the DNA. (PMID 12682016, PMID 20147459)
8	beta-Sheet binding to DNA	Class description: The DNA-binding domains of this superclass bind to DNA through single extended strands or beta-sheets. 
9	beta-Barrel DNA-binding domains	Class description: Other DNA-binding domains interacting with DNA through beta-folded structures and not covered by superclasses 7-9 are compiled in this superclass.
